---
description: Organizational tactics for execurting our strategy
---

# Key Tactics

## Tactical overview
### Go slow to go fast approach
We start every partner interaction with empathetic listening to identify what the school or district needs, including their strategic goals and cultural commitment to the kinds of learner-centered strategies they might wish to adopt. We then leverage our facilitation experience in Design Thinking, as well as the kinds of learner-centered strategies described above to co-design a scope of work that involves a series of customized design sprints, focus groups, professional development workshops, study visits, and/or targeted coaching/co-design sessions. The scope of work will provide the overall project plan to ensure OWL (and other partners, as needed) is providing the specific support the school/district needs in order to meet their goals, as well as the cultural systems to ensure they can be sustained over the long term.   
    
After this initial phase and all formal contracts are in place, most projects will begin with a series of student and community focus groups to ensure we have solid empathy data to clearly define the problem and solution space for the task(s) at hand. This is followed by a 1 to 5-day design sprint with local educators that have opted-in to be part of the work. This cohort typically includes teachers, administrators, coaches, school and district support, and if possible, students and stakeholders from the community. This group of early adopters will use design thinking to co-design the details for one or more prototype solutions that leverage local voice, talent, and assets. We then work with this group, inviting others as needed, in follow-up face-to-face or virtual sessions as we test and refine the prototypes into a highly customized and localized innovation action plan—one that addresses the school/district’s initial goals and strategies. This action plan sets the stage for the rest of the project, as OWL facilitators provide just-in-time support, coaching, study visits, and other targeted support to help drive the action plan to fruition, including extensive use of agile and project management tools and protocols.   
    
The ultimate goal in this process is to build local capacity that transfers the systemic knowledge to maintain and continually improve the plan to local experts so that it can be sustained and scaled without requiring OWL’s direct facilitation. This “working ourselves out of a job” ensures that we maximize local talent as the school/district refines and continually improves their prototype solutions for their context and not ours or that of another location (the Achilles heel canned, 8-step innovation programs). This approach, done well, means that the desired change is truly baked into the school/district’s cultural DNA.   
    
### OWL's approach to marketing
We generally don’t try to "evangelize" our approach, knowing that we are always going to be outdone by slick marketing of organizations that make lots of money marketing the latest edufad strategy or quick fix. That’s not our gig. Besides, culture change is admittedly a tough sell\! As such, we let our results speak for themselves. We know that if we consistently do great work and then rely on the power of story from schools that have seen what is possible when they invest the time and energy to build authentic cultures of learner-centered innovation, other schools and districts will contact us. That’s who we want to work with —educators who already "get it" in terms of knowing that the status quo model is not serving students as it should, especially students who have historically been furthest from opportunity. They just need help getting there. Also note that part of the initial “intake” conversation we have with a potential client is ensuring that Open Way Learning is indeed a good fit per the school/district’s goals. In other words, if an organization is only interested in a one-off PD session on an innovative strategy such as those described above, and is not really interested in the cultural elements that are essential for such strategies to be implemented well and sustained, then we will typically refer them to other organizations we know of or work with.   
    
### Pointing to best bractices
We see too many examples of organizations who take an existing idea and simply repackage it as the new, quick fix solution they can market to schools and districts. Many of these so-called solutions are nothing more than attempts to hijack and market an originally good idea into a slick program that becomes a fad, promising much and delivering little. We refuse to do that. Rather, we are constantly on the lookout for tools, resources, case studies, research, and other examples that have credible evidence of success. And rather than trying to replicate and claim them as our own, we research, evaluate, and then reference the original sources that are consistent with the Open Way Learning philosophy and approach. We then encourage the schools we work with to do their own follow up research of those sources so they can be better adapted to meet their own needs, even if that ultimately means working with these organizations and not us. Our mission as a nonprofit is to help scale learner-centered cultures of innovation to more schools, for more students, even if we are not directly involved in that change. Our intent, therefore, is to collaborate instead of compete. As such, like-minded organizations and partners are also successful as we work together to affect the kind and scale of change that is required in the education space. This “all boats rise” approach is also consistent with the open source philosophy that undergirds our work: we provide the user with the source code so that they are able to better adapt it to their own context.  
    
## Why do this work?
We are living in an unprecedented age, where the only thing that is certain is change. But why is it that as technology evolves at an exponential rate, our education systems are essentially frozen in time? Why are we still using an industrial model for school that was designed for a different time and age? The answer speaks to a sense of urgency that educators must embrace unless we want to see our education institutions become less relevant to students and the communities in which they live. We can no longer follow a status quo model, where too many students see their years of “doing school” as a passive exercise, irrelevant to their interests and ambitions and leaving too many to fall between the cracks, ill equipped to meet the challenges of the 4th Industrial Revolution in which we live. There IS a better way\! Forward-thinking educators, schools, communities, and organizations across the globe are responding to this frenetic pace of change through collective action that creates the cultural conditions where innovative, learner-centered strategies can thrive, providing every student with the durable skills they will need in today’s rapidly changing world. Every student deserves this kind of school so that they can better meet our global challenges and societal expectations. Open Way Learning stands ready to help anyone who is willing to create positive change toward this goal. 

## An example roadmap

### Leading with equity
We always try to start each partnership with focus groups, surveys, and other means to develop a comprehensive set of quantitative and qualitative data that will inform the process going forward. These data typically include, but are not limited to an analysis of any themes and/or contradictions from various focus groups and surveys, statistics and perception data from a cross-section of community stakeholders, and statements of relative alignment to other applicable local, regional, or state goals. These data are also the basis for the “problem definition” within the design sprint phase of the work \- i.e. the basis for promising strategies that garner broad support across the school or district.  

### Building the coalition of the willing
Rooted in the “user” experience of students, we will establish with an opt-in school team why a move to a learner-centered culture (with authentic experiential learning and mastery learning at its core) is a moral imperative to address historical equity gaps and the realities of today’s rapidly changing world. We will connect and define this “why” at an individual and collective level with the school team.  

### Images of possibility
Leveraging the creative tension between our current state and desired future state, we will feed the imagination by exploring the key features and essential elements of a learner-centered environment, including specific examples and case studies that explicitly define how the school team wants a shift to occur so that it is catalyzed from within and not imposed by us or others. As a way to further spawn this out-of-the-box thinking, OWL will provide a list of possible school site visits (face-to-face and virtual) and conferences that could inspire stakeholders with new paradigms of what is possible relative to the goals of students, educators, and other community stakeholders. OWL will then assist with the coordination, facilitation, and debrief of these experiences where needed and on a case-by-case basis.  

### Localized ideation
This above process then leads to brainstorming of ideas which provides the school with an array of community-generated ideas that will be prioritized as the basis of its strategic plan for change/improvement. Moreover, the resulting idea bank can also be used as an evergreen resource for years to come in the district, as it will contain well-supported and innovative possibilities that have been vetted from stakeholders.  

### Prototype remix
We will individually and collectively brainstorm ideas that are informed from the images of possibility, but adapted to the school team’s own context (assets, constraints, goals, etc.). These ideas will be synthesized into a “Minimum Viable Product” (MVP) that represents the school’s initial learner-centered strategy.  

### Messy middle
We will use thinking protocols, critical friends, and a problem of practice format to continually improve our prototypes per student, stakeholder, and peer feedback, as well as deeper dives into learner-centered best practices, case studies, and essential elements.  

### Strategic plan of action
The primary deliverable from the above process is a comprehensive strategic plan for learner-centered innovation, co-created with the school team and informed by empathy data and ideas. OWL will continue to use the design process to ensure that the final set of prioritized prototype ideas has been refined per feasibility criteria defined by the school and is tested per community goals, needs, and expectations.   

### Modeling excellence
At this point in the process, OWL will taper down its support for a gradual release of responsibility to the school team as they implement their strategic plan. Visits and workshops will be co-designed with school staff, including new participants as we expand the “opt in” approach from the above steps. This final step will take a strategic view of the supports and conditions needed to successfully refine, sustain, and scale our prototypes in the school and will use Agile tools and protocols to establish the critical path items to meet short and long-term goals.   

### Ongoing support
OWL will then provide periodic visits to help ensure action plans for continuing and deepening the impact of this work are indeed occurring as expected. This process will include, but not be limited to:   

* Engage in reflection and dialogue with the leadership team and school stakeholders to identify successes, challenges, and areas for improvement.  
* Based on the data and feedback collected, make necessary adjustments to the school’s strategies, resources, and supports to ensure continuous improvement and effectiveness.  
* Disseminate the project's findings, best practices, and lessons learned with the school (via routine trip or program reports) broader educational community, fostering a culture of collaboration and continuous improvement in experiential learning. These efforts are consistent with OWL’s principle of Open Source Sharing and can position the school as a regional or national leader in innovative, learner-centered education.

## Other tactics we will employ throughout the process

### Routine check-ins
As the teachers are beginning their learner-centered journey, providing intensive and consistent support from experienced practitioners will be essential. OWL will provide assistance to teachers with troubleshooting, planning, and project management in a just-in-time format through virtual meetings. These will happen in between face-to-face meetings and also includes asynchronous support where OWL’s team can provide feedback on works in progress.  

### Routine workshops
Full day workshops on a \~monthly basis provide an opportunity for teachers to share problems of practice and collective wisdom through a community of practice, while elevating the positive progress of the school in a celebratory atmosphere. As much as possible, OWL will integrate outdoor education and community connections into these workshops. They will also enhance the pedagogical knowledge and skills of teachers by modeling instructional design tools and processes to manage the experiential classroom. In the spirit of Liberatory Design, they will include students, parents, and community stakeholders to ensure that curricular design is reflective of the needs of students and community.

### Documentation and storytelling
By documenting the process of the school’s transformation through walkthrough and observation data, in addition to capturing video, student / educator interviews, and focus groups, OWL will help the school leverage the Power of Story so that their roadmap of innovation can be shared with other schools \- locally and across the country.   

### Leadership support
Given the ambitious nature of this work, the school's leaders will require ongoing communication and active support in order to effectively enable the conditions for change. OWL will attend monthly leadership meetings, as well as other ad hoc meetings to support this process through modeling best practices and protocols, reacting to inevitable challenges, defining and reviewing metrics that reinforce desired outcomes, and continuing to empower their teachers as co-designers of change. 
