---
description: Open Way Learning's approach to working with partners and clients
---

# Partner/client-facing work

The overwhelming majority of the work that Open Way Learning does is client-facing projects with teachers, administrators, and other key stakeholders in schools, districts, or other educational organizations. Each of these projects has a customized scope, sequence, and timing that is co-designed with the client per their own needs, goals, and assets. To ensure compliance with all legal, finance, and insurance requirements, the actual work must be done per a [Statement of Work](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1br4BXUVkxq2ASWy6z6U3c273ROUnRUc4n54Y9CiqwbM/edit?usp=sharing), which constitutes a formal contract between OWL and the client that specifies timing, terms and rates, scope of work, client contacts, desired outcomes, etc. This Statement of Work is coordinated by an OWL Project Manager (the primary contact for the project) and supported by a second OWL employee (the secondary contact). These two roles are vitally important to ensure all aspects of the Statement of Work are addressed as intended and in a way that demonstrates OWL’s commitment to the highest levels of service quality and client satisfaction. Given the critical nature of the primary and secondary contacts for each project, OWL has developed the following set of expectations for these roles as a way to ensure a consistent level of excellence is provided for every client interaction.

The primary contact is the project’s team leader and manager and is expected to have the deepest knowledge of all technical, financial and professional aspects of the project.  They also liaise with the project’s secondary contact, the client, and with all other team members assigned to this project, including contractors, vendors, and other internal and external partners. Specific responsibilities include:

* Exercising good judgment to generate an overall strategy and specific action plans that meet the scope and spirit of the Statement of Work, including coordinating and planning all client-facing interactions (workshops, coaching sessions, design sprints, etc.) so that they meet the overall goals and expectations.
* Monitoring the project’s progression criteria opposite agreed to milestones, desired outcomes, and internal/external constraints.
* Routine communication with the client contact(s) to ensure their goals and needs are being met in an efficient, cost effective, and high quality manner (this includes survey/evaluation results from any OWL interaction).
* Coordination with other OWL team members and contract partners regarding direction on areas to focus, while enabling a sense of collective leadership so these team members are able to make mission-aligned decisions per the requirements of the Statement of Work (and, as appropriate, Independent Contractor Agreement).
* Routinely and candidly highlighting to all applicable stakeholders the project’s successes, changes, and headwinds, accompanying the latter with appropriate failure analysis or other actions that model transparent, continuous improvement.

While the secondary contact for any project is not as directly responsible for the routine coordination, communication, and monitoring of the project details as what is described above for the primary contact, they are responsible for maintaining a minimal level of awareness so that as needed, they can step in and fulfill these responsibilities in case the primary contact has to be absent. As such, they are expected to hold routine check in meetings and debriefs so that they can provide seamless, high quality support anytime it is needed.
