---
description: Open Way Learning's PTO policies
---

# Flexible paid time off
OWL embraces Patagonia’s [Let My People Go Surfing](https://www.amazon.com/Let-People-Surfing-Education-Businessman/dp/0143037838) approach to work time, where all full and part time employees can flex their work schedule as long as they get the work done per their role and responsibility, especially when it comes to consistently meeting and exceeding all internal operational and external client requirements per the mission of the organization. In other words, while you should not miss commitments, including meetings and workshops, you can step away from work to get your creative juices flowing so that you can bring your best self to the work. Time away from work can be extremely helpful for maintaining a healthy work/life balance.  OWL also encourages leadership to set the example by taking time off when needed, and ensuring their employees do the same. This is because not only is time away from work aligned with OWL's operating principle of “family and friends first, work second,” but it is vital to maintaining mental health. It is also a core part of the creative process. 

Because of this approach to time off, as of 2022, OWL moved to a Flexible Paid Time Off (PTO) policy for all full time, exempt employees. What we care about are your results, not how long you work. In short, the Flexible PTO policy means that as long as you have coordinated your planned time off with your manager or the OWL Leadership Team, you are free to take PTO, without a set limit per year on the amount of PTO any employee can take. However, while you don't need to ask approval for time off, it shouldn’t be at the expense of the work getting done. When planning your time off make sure your manager, colleagues, and clients you directly work with are aware of your absence by telling them about your plans. 

There are, of course, limits to ensure a PTO system does indeed work for the organization. Regular attendance and punctuality are still key factors in your job performance, especially when working directly with current and potential clients and partners. Consistency is also important in this flexible work arrangement. As such, employees are generally expected to work a minimum and consistent number of hours each day, although each employee’s start and end times may vary around a fixed set of core hours between 10 a.m. to 3 p.m. (local time) each weekday. Moreover, employees are also generally expected to work a nominal 40 hour week, although they may vary their work schedules to better accommodate personal responsibilities and client expectations, assuming those adjustments do not interfere with the work that is needed or cause an undue burden on others. The key is clear, proactive communication to your colleagues and manager. Excessive absences, tardiness, or failure to meet minimum work expectations will be grounds for discipline up to and including termination. 

As a good rule of thumb, you should inform your manager of your planned PTO at least twice as many days advance notice as the total amount of days that you plan to take off. For example, if you plan to take 3 days off, you should let your manager know at a minimum of 6 business days before. If your planned leave exceeds the 25 calendar days in a year (including weekends and holidays), please make sure to get approval from the OWL Leadership Team. You will need additional permission if you want to take more than 14 consecutive calendar days (including weekends and holidays) off. The 14 calendar day limit is per vacation, not per year. You can have multiple vacations per year that add up to more than 25 calendar days in total; there is no limit to this. However, if you're gone for 72 hours without notification, this could be deemed as Job abandonment. 

Also coordinate with your team before taking time off, especially during popular or official holidays, so that we can ensure continuity with client-facing work. We want to ensure we have adequate coverage and avoid situations where all/most of the team is taking time off at the same time. If you have urgent tasks, but something comes up or takes longer than expected, just ensure the rest of your team knows and someone can pick up the tasks. Also, as a general guideline, if public schools or government offices in your area are closed for a particular national or regional holiday, that it’s recognized for OWL employees in that location to take off as well. 

Finally, no one is expected to work or attend calls on days they are on vacation or out of the office for an official public holiday. You are strongly encouraged to unplug, relax, and recover! Nevertheless, use the following communication guidance to ensure we still can meet all client needs and expectations, even in your absence (this is also for audit and compliance purposes):

* All employees are required to track their vacation time via their OWL Google Calendar as the single source of truth to accurately track and communicate all time off. 
* Keep your out of office message updated, including the contact details of a co-worker in case anything urgent or critical comes into your inbox while you're away. 
* If you do have to respond to an incident while outside of your normal working hours, you should feel free to take off some time the following day to recover and be well-rested. 

OWL also has a generous parental leave policy for all full time employees, offering up to 15 weeks of paid leave to birthing mothers and six weeks for parents who adopt. We also offer a Leave Share program that allows full time employees to give six weeks of paid parental leave to a spouse or partner who isn’t eligible for parental leave from their employer. 

OWL also encourages employees to volunteer within their community to take care of others. Consider taking time in support of causes that matter to you and support your personal commitment to OWL's values such as diversity, inclusion, and belonging, as well as the time you need for jury duty, military leave, bereavement leave, or other needs, as well as to take time off to vote, volunteer at the polls or volunteer in your community. 
